## Introduction

Art has a long-standing historical relationship with the city, particularly in the form of arts patronage, architecture, monumental objects, and in more recent times through public art initiatives. Public art is in some ways antithetical to a modernist aesthetic epitomized by hermetic spaces of galleries where art is perceived as something autonomous, apolitical and neutral (Gablik, 1995; Hall & Robertson 2001; Miles, 1997). Public art, on the other hand, is inherently social and purposeful.

Traditionally, art in a public realm was used as means of aesthetic enhancement, or memorialization (Hall, 2003/2004). However, since the early 1980s cultural modes of tackling structural issues of cities were gaining prominence and public art was increasingly seen as an essential component of material relations and reproduction of society. The institutional recognition that art has a social agenda lead to the creation of ‘percent-of-art’ policies and more art being funded by the public sector (Gablik, 1995; Hall & Robertson, 2001). Advocates of this cultural approach argue that public art contributes to the alleviation of environmental, social and economic problems locating it firmly within the process of urban regeneration (Hall, 2003/2004).

Alongside the formalization of public art a prominent strand of urban studies literature emerged in the late 1980s and early 1990s arguing that “culture was being deployed in a commodified and sanitised form in cities to create the impression of affluence, vibrancy, conviviality, change and regeneration, while at the same time being used to mask the increasingly fractured and polarised social and economic realities that characterised life for the majority of urban dwellers” (Hall, 2003/2004, p. 111). This critical perspective of public art is the focus of the work presented here.

This paper looks at critical literature related to public art as a means of urban regeneration and innovation in the late 20th and the onset of the 21st century. It first explores the theoretical underpinnings of public art’s critique, followed by an examination of methods for studying art in an urban context. The paper then discusses a potential of art to contribute to the process of urban innovation and positions public art in a broader urban research framework.