## Critical theory of public art

Institutionalized form of public art gained prominence in the 20th century as a discipline with no precise definitions, no constructive theory and without coherent objectives (Phillips, 1989/2004). Advocates of public art often base their claims on fuzzy concepts such as place, nature, community, or identity which are hard to define in universal terms (Hall & Robertson, 2001). Due to its multifaceted, intangible and fluid character, any attempt to theorize public art is an inherently tentative and speculative enterprise, as is apparent throughout this section.

Surprisingly little attention in the literature is devoted to the notion of what comprises ‘public’ in the phrase ‘public art’. Phillips (1989/2004) refers to an ideal of the common, exemplified with a reference to public and civic space in early cities in the US, as a site that represents the concept and the enactment of a democratic process. This public area “was the forum where information was shared and public debate occurred: a charged, dynamic coalescence. The common was not a place of absolute conformity, predictability, or acquiescence, but of spirited disagreement, of conflict, of only modest compromises – and of controversy“ (p. 195).

Extending this notion of the common, it becomes clear that the installation of public art within urban fabric is inevitably a political exercise (Sharp, Pollock, & Paddison, 2005). Public art thus manifests itself both as a physical object or process embedded in the city’s structure and as tacit imagery in the minds of citizens. According to Phillips (2003) public art “balances at the boundaries, occupying the inchoate spaces between public and private, architecture and art, object and environment, process and production, performance and installation” (Phillips, 2003, p. 122). Bianchini and Ghilardi (2007) use the term ‘urban mindscape’ as a structure for thinking about a place to express a similar sentiment, indicating something that “exists between the physical landscape of a city and people’s visual and cultural perceptions of it” (p. 281).

Given its capacity to shape the social life of the city, public art has become a staple component in formulating urban policy. According to Policy Study Institute (1994), public art can accrue benefits such as: contributing to local distinctiveness, attracting companies and investment; having a role in cultural tourism; adding to land values; creating employment; increasing the use of open spaces; reducing wear and tear on buildings and lowering levels of vandalism.

With a distinctive economic focus public art administrators operate “in a kind of hybrid space, a web made up of legal concerns, branding, mission, public perception, and the formidable public sector–private sector divide” (Regan, 2017, p. 82). As competition for public space grows, “public art policies have become calcified and increasingly bureaucratic” (Baca, 1995, p. 136). As a result, ‘The Public Art Machine’ produces bland, unprovocative art that fails to critically intervene in the process of urban development (Hall & Robertson, 2001; Phillips, 1989/2004). Public art projects often fail, perhaps paradoxically, because of the heterogeneity of civic life they attempt to recognize and reflect in an attempt to cater to everyone (Phillips, 2003).

The way public art is procured and produced relies upon “naturalization of the city as a transhistorical form, propagating essentialist myth of good, even ideal, city form” (Hall & Roberston, 2001, p. 21). This technocratic view of the city sees social problems as something to be managed by the provision of facilities and amenities. From this perspective, public art is supposed to provide universal solutions which are inevitably contingent upon partial readings by their producers and are in conflict with a notion of places as “permeable, both bounded and unbounded, local and global, contested, mutable and socially contingent […] and not reducible to universal essences” (Hall & Robertson, 2001, p. 19).

To more easily identify culprits in the production of public art, several authors apply a broad typology to distinguish between large flagship regeneration projects and small-scale community regeneration projects.

Flagship regeneration projects are characterized by large budgets drawn from ‘percent-of-art’ policies, by significant involvement of private development companies and often contain prominent work of famous artists (Hall, 2003/2004; Hall & Robertson, 2001). These prestige projects facilitate “culturally sensitive place branding and marketing” (Bianchini, 2007, p. 281) and have a significant promotional function, providing ‘cover shots’ for media as part of a global inter-urban competition for investment and jobs (Loftman & Nevin, 2003). Such projects are “fundamentally more interested in capital investment or maintaining social order than with improving the lives of residents of a city” (Sharp, Pollock, & Paddison, 2005, p. 1014).

The capital-intensive large-scale regeneration projects have drawn criticism relating to art’s endorsement of environmentally damaging and socially exclusive development based on essentialist notions of urban issues and elitist language or art and politics (Miles, 1997; Sharp, Pollock, & Paddison, 2005). Many of flagship projects are reminiscent of historical monumentalist production of public art in the service of dominance and endorsement of ‘official’ views of the city, chiefly those of local authorities and commercial developers (Hall, 2003/2004).

These monumental structures are produced within a dominant framework of values, publicly representing selective versions of history and beliefs about the order of the world (Duncan, 2000; Hall, 2003/2004; Miles, 1997). They displace values into an aesthetic domain “allowing the impact of power or money on everyday life to be unquestioned” (Miles, 1997, p. 58) and persuading us of the “justice of the acts they represent” by inspiring “a sense of awe by their scale and the importance of the artist” (Baca, 1995, p. 132).

Corporate patronage of public art is another often criticized aspect of prestige regeneration projects which have become “one of the mechanisms by which corporate finance is able to inscribe difference and exclusion into the urban landscape by lending these spaces auras of distinction and exclusivity” (Hall & Robertson, 2001, p. 20). In such context, public art has become complicit in, rather than critical of, exclusive uneven urban development and gentrification (Hall & Robertson, 2001; Miles, 1997).

Second widely-recognized category of public art regeneration projects is comprised of small-scale community projects. These projects are characterized by lower budgets and originate from local government, volunteers and social activists. Community public art projects propagate broader advocacy of the cultural, rather than purely property-led or economic approaches to urban regeneration. From this perspective, art is seen as a critical public catalyst that can help communities understand their problems and facilitate their solutions - here artists are seen not just as suppliers of objects but also as problem solvers (Hall & Robertson, 2001; Phillips, 1989/2004).

Provocative public art presents a particularly potent method for re-semanticizing or subverting dominant meanings of space or buildings by shocking citizens into a “more conscious relationship with urban space” (Cresswell, 1998, p. 276) and “questioning accepted versions of history, illuminating hidden functions of public institutions and disturbing preconceptions about systems that govern public life” (Hall & Robertson, 2001, p. 17). Dery (2010) has coined the term ‘guerrilla semiotics’ to describe these subversive low-cost forms of public art that “draw attention to the power and meanings inscribed into the urban environment” (Sharp, Pollock, & Paddison, 2005, p. 1015).

Graffiti and ‘culture jamming’ (the addition of slogans to billboards and advertising to subvert the intended message) are giving a voice to those who lack the means and capital to legitimately write up their messages onto the urban landscape, turning the one-way communication of advertising into an interchange of ideas and images (Cresswell, 1998; Luna, 1995; Sharp, Pollock, & Paddison, 2005). Several authors reference the work of a Polish artist Krzysztof Wodiczko and his projections onto monuments which abolish the familiar and expose the underlying symbolism of the piece of public art. Miles (1997) calls this type of public art ‘anti-monuments’.