## Methods for evaluating public art

There is no comprehensive critical framework for evaluating claims of public art proponents and empirical tools for measuring the impact of public art initiatives are also absent (Hall & Robertson, 2001). Existing critical paradigms - semiotic and productionist - focus on art objects and their production processes rather than on the public perception of art.

Majority of critical writing on public art is based on cultural studies and cultural geography that derive their theoretical sophistication from applying the Lefebvrian framework of analysis (Hall, 2003/2004). These methods use semiotic deconstruction to uncover symbolic meaning inherent in public art projects, and the context within which this art is produced, however, they have little to say about the public. This poses a significant research challenge since urban meaning is not immanent to architectural form and space, but changes according to the social interaction of city dwellers (Hall, 2004/2003). From this perspective “neither the intentions of the producers of public art, nor its iconographies necessarily correspond to the meanings derived from the incorporation of public art into the experiences of the public’s everyday lives” (Hall, 2003/2004, p. 113).

Other more traditional methodological tools for the analysis of public art include surveys, focus groups, workshops, semi-structured and in-depth interviews with individuals and groups, case studies, recorded opinions, reading of social histories and reports of industrial and economic change in the city (Hall, 2003/2004; Policy Study Institute, 1994).
T
here is a consensus among public art’s critics that the field would benefit from developing more inclusive and comprehensive methods of analysis based on “integrative modes of thinking that focus on the relational nature of reality rather than on discrete objects“ (Gablik, 1995, p. 83). These novel methods are inspired by more established fields such as geography, social sciences and other studies of urban spaces and incorporate ethnographic observation and visual methodologies for analysis of popular visual knowledges of public art (Sharp, Pollock, & Paddison, 2005).