## Public art and innovation

The potential to engage citizens and provoke a more thoughtful (rather than unconscious) and critical stance towards the city is public art’s principal means of supporting urban innovation (Cresswell, 1998). Community participation in the production of public art fosters a sense of ownership and helps tackle social exclusion by providing stimulus and interest for alienated people (Hall & Robertson, 2001). This form o public art aims to produce social processes rather than objects (Miles, 1997). For example, temporary event-based projects that celebrate street life such as festivals, carnivals, street theatre, and street music provide “means to articulate the implicit values of a city when its users occupy the place of determining what the city is” (Miles, 1997, p. 59).

For facilitation of such forms of community innovation to be successful, the language of public art needs to loose the ‘art gaze’ and become more inclusive, particularly language as it is used by public art producers administrators. Senie (2003) argues that terms like ‘site-specific’ are loaded with theoretical baggage and are incompatible with the ever-changing urban landscape. She suggests that we instead strive for ‘site-responsive’ public art which has a capacity for an ongoing evolving relationship with its neighborhood (Senie, 2003).

The overreaching aim of contemporary public art in the context of innovation is to move away from the radical individualism of modernist aesthetic where the role of the audience is that of a detached spectator-observer. Gablik (1995) proposes ‘connective aesthetics’ as an alternative conceptualization that sees human nature as deeply embedded in the world and “makes art into a model for connectedness and healing by opening up being to its full dimensionality – not just disembodied eye“ (p. 86).

For such a shift to occur, public art needs to be viewed as an integral component of a broader urban development strategy. As outlined earlier, the flagship regeneration projects position public art squarely in economic and planning disciplines, while a community small-scale regeneration projects are closer to the fields of justice and psychological well being.  The former receives most of the funding and attention, but a collective shift in attitudes and resources towards the later is the key to unlocking the untapped potential of public art to foster innovation and citizen well being.